About Pratham,

Pratham is an innovative learning organization created to improve the quality of education in India. Established in 1995 to provide education to children in the slums of Mumbai, Pratham has grown in both scope and scale, with programs today reaching children and youth across the country.
As one of the largest non-governmental organizations in the country, Pratham focuses on high-quality, low-cost and replicable interventions to address gaps in the education system. Working directly with children and youth as well as through large-scale collaborations with government systems, Pratham programs reach millions of lives every year. Pratham’s Teaching at the Right Level (TaRL) approach has demonstrated proven impact on children’s learning outcomes and is now being adapted to contexts outside India.

Recognition:

Pratham has been recognized internationally by prestigious awards and prominent organizations for both the quality of our innovations and for our extensive impact.

Awards:

The Indira Gandhi Award Year: 19 November, 2022: Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development: The International Jury of the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development, chaired by the former Chief Justice of India, Justice T. S. Thakur, announced the award of the Prize for 2021 to Pratham Education Foundation, as a pioneering civil society organisation dedicated to improving the

2021 Yidan Prize for Education Development Year: 2021: Dr. Rukmini Banerji was awarded the 2021 Yidan Prize for Education Development - the world’s highest education accolade. The Yidan Prize is an inclusive education award that recognizes individuals, or up to three-member teams, who have contributed significantly to education research and development

Lui Che Woo 2018 Prize in the Positive Energy Category for eliminating illiteracy, Hong Kong (2018) : “Our own values and vision of making the world a better, more positive place are very similar to that of the Prize, and this generous honor from an international award will greatly support the work of Pratham in continuing to promote quality education to the children who are most in need.” — Dr. Rukmini Banerji

Medal for Distinguished Service to Madhav Chavan, Teachers College, Columbia University (2017): Since its founding in 1887 to help immigrant children and their families, the College has been a powerful force for social justice, championing education that opens doors, unlocks human potential and debates our society’s most inconvenient truths.  Each year, the College awards the Medal to individuals who have made outstanding contributions to education and human

BBVA Foundation ‘Frontiers of Knowledge’ Award (2014): "Pratham has expanded the scope of education in resource constrained areas… It has done so through two significant innovations: the creation of simple, accurate and reliable tools for communities to assess learning; and a process that uses scientific evidence to develop new cost-effective programs that drastically improve learning levels."— Jury citation Pratham received the 2014 Banco.


Recognition by the Asia Society as Asia Game Changer (2014): Dr. Madhav Chavan was named a 2014 Asia Game Changer for giving the gift of literacy to millions of Indian children. Launched in 2014 by the Asia Society, the awards recognize those leaders contributing to a positive future for Asia in the core areas of policy and business, arts and culture, and education.

The Global Journal named Pratham as one of the “Top 100 NGOs” in the world (2012 & 2013): Recognizing the significant role of NGOs as influential agents of change on a global scale, The Global Journal identifies NGOs doing impactful work and curates them into a coveted list. Pratham has been named on the list for two years consecutively.

WISE Prize for Education to Madhav Chavan 2012: "I had friends working for women’s liberation. I had friends working for the popularization of science. I said to them—none of these things you want to do are possible if people cannot read and write."— Dr. Madhav Chavan, co-founder, Pratham Pratham co-founder Dr. Madhav Chavan was the recipient of the 2012 World Innovation Summit

Recognition by the Asia Society as Asia Game Changer (2014) : Dr. Madhav Chavan was named a 2014 Asia Game Changer for giving the gift of literacy to millions of Indian children. Launched in 2014 by the Asia Society, the awards recognize those leaders contributing to a positive future for Asia in the core areas of policy and business, arts and culture.

The Kravis Prize in Leadership (2010): “Pratham's approach to improving educational quality is targeted, cost-effective and sustainable. By collaborating closely with government and local communities, Pratham has shown tremendous results and improved millions of children's lives.” — Henry R. Kravis, founding partner, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co and alumnus and trustee, Claremont McKenna College Pratham was selected as the 2010 winner.

Business Today award for one of the Most Powerful Women in Impact to Rukmini Banerji (2018): Business Today picks the Most powerful Women in fields of Business and Impact each year. In 2018, Pratham’s CEO, Dr. Rukmini Banerji, was featured in the list of awardees. Business Today commented saying “She has taken a host initiatives to make elementary education realistic for school children”.

Social Enterprise of the Year: Business Standard Corporate Social Responsibility Awards:  “[Pratham] started in 1995, but even in 2017 they are very relevant in the journey. They continue to excel in what they are doing, taking it beyond what they have done in the past.”— Deep Joshi, award jury member and co-founder of Professional Assistance for Development Action (PRADAN).

HT for Mumbai ‘Changemaker’ title under the ‘Education’ category to Farida Lambay (2016): explaination: Ms.Farida Lambay was awarded the HTForMumbai 'Changemaker' title under the 'Education' category by the jury and the 'Popular' category on 12th January,2016. “Pratham’s volunteers not only helped rescue child labourers, but also took efforts to reunite the children with their families.”  RAVINDER SINGAL, Inspector General of Police


CSR Leader Award by CEO INDIA to Co-Founders Madhav Chavan & Farida Lambay: On March 12th, Co-Founders Dr. Madhav Chavan and Ms. Farida Lambay awarded the CSR Leader Award 2015 by CEO INDIAread.

Pratham's Approach:

Pratham addresses gaps in education systems with innovative, low-cost, replicable interventions that span the age spectrum. Working both directly and through government systems, these programs collectively reach millions of children and thousands of school dropouts each year. In “direct” work, a Pratham instructor works with children either in the school or in the community, whereas the “partnership” model involves Pratham teams working closely with government teams at the state, district or city level to design and implement programs. Pratham’s approach to improving learning outcomes continues to serve as a model, both within India and beyond.

Chief Executive Officer:
Rukmini Banerji is the Chief Executive Officer of Pratham Education Foundation.
Rukmini Banerji was trained as an economist at St. Stephen’s College (Delhi) and the Delhi School of Economics. She was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University (1981-83) and completed her PhD at the University of Chicago in 1991. Rukmini returned to India in 1996 and joined Pratham. Over the years, she has worked extensively in Pratham’s education programs in rural and urban areas. Along with her teams, she has played a major role in designing and supporting large scale partnerships with state governments in India, for improving children’s learning outcomes. Rukmini led Pratham’s research and assessment efforts including the Annual Status of Education Report (ASER) exercise from 2005 to 2014. Since 2015, she has been the CEO of Pratham.
In 2008, Rukmini received the Maulana Abul Kalam Shiksha Puraskar by the Government of Bihar, India. She was the first recipient of this award. In 2021, Rukmini was awarded the Yidan Prize for Education Development. 
Originally from Bihar, she is now based between New Delhi and Pune. Rukmini writes frequently on education in both Hindi and English dailies in India and enjoys writing books and stories for children. 

Second Chance in Education.
India has achieved almost universal enrollment at primary schooling, however, the trend does not sustain as children graduate to secondary grades and upwards. Over the last decade or so, girls have dropped out of school disproportionately due to factors like early marriage, chores at home and cost of education [National Family Health Survey-5 (2019-21) data].
Pratham’s experience indicates that once a learner has dropped out of school, it is near impossible for them to find their way back. While India has open schooling opportunities, there is lack of awareness, accessibility, adequate motivation and support for a student to use open schooling as a way to continue their education.
Fewer people progressing for higher studies, low quality secondary education, an ever-increasing demand of a skilled labour force reinforces the need for an effective intervention in the secondary education space. A secondary school certificate is a prerequisite for entry into higher education, skill apprenticeship and for promotion in jobs. Pratham believes that by making education accessible and closer to home, it is possible to overcome logistical and social challenges and begin to bridge the gender gap in learning and education.
Understanding the importance of secondary education, especially Grade 10, Pratham has deployed a focused intervention, the Second Chance program, to enable young girls and women to complete their secondary schooling and forge strong pathways for the future.
